Astro by default,
anything that you put in the pages
directory gets treated as a route.
So index.html is your / home route.
So just, your site.com/,
that's what index is.
And if we wanna create something
else we can create about.astro, but
we can also use mark down here so
we can create about.md and
we'll get /about there as well.
You can ship .HTML files if you'd like.
Those .HTML files are missing
a few of the Astro features.
So those are like if you're trying
to migrate something over and
you don't have time to make it work with
the astro components syntax or something.
Or you've got some special
thing you don't wanna rewrite,
drop some HTML in
incrementally migrate over.
With a plugin you can use MDX,
if you're familiar with MDX.
We won't really touch on that today.
I've talked about it in
previous workshops and
there are great resources out there for
anybody who wants to learn.
But the general idea is MDX is
a way to write markdown that
supports JSX components.
So you can bring in a React component or
there's one for Svelte, there's one for
Solid, and that way you can kinda build
out sites that are mostly content driven,
but where you need it.
Like if you wanna put in a dynamic
newsletter capture or something,
you can use a React component to
drop that in, and MDX allows that.
We also have the ability to use .js or
.ts in a markdown page,
which is a special case
called an endpoint.
We'll look at that later when we
get into the rss feed for the blog.
But you can use that for delivering json,
sending up a little, like a simple API,
and a whole bunch of other things
that we can talk about later on.
So what I wanna do is I want
to create an about page.
So I'm gonna create a new file and
we're gonna set it up as about.md.
So this about page doesn't
have anything but text on it.
So I'm gonna keep it
as simple as possible.
I just wanna have some markdown.
And in here I have the content.
So I have this workshop assets folder.
And this is all the stuff that I don't
want anybody to have to watch me type out
or I don't want you to have
to transcribe off the screen.
So whenever I'm using one of these,
I'll try to remember to call it out, but
a lot of times, I'm just gonna be
copy-pasting something out of here.
So for this about page,
I'm going to copy this and
come in to my new about page and save.
And then when I come out here,
I can navigate to About,
and we've got a page, right?
So this is the Astro workflow.
We're kind of just getting in here.
We're creating pages,
we're making things just function.
And when I say that things
are really quick to start,
this is kind of what I mean.
We were just making the website now,
right?
So if you wanna quickly mock something
out, you wanna try something out,
it happens nice and fast.
Next, these pages aren't linked together.
They're not styled we
don't have a lot going on.
So what we wanna do is create
what's called a layout.
And this is gonna introduce
the idea of an astro component.
So the index page is,
you may have noticed a .astro file.
So that's an astro component, but we're
not really using it as a component right
now, we're just putting some HTML in here.
So let's create a new
folder called layouts.
And inside of that folder,
we're gonna create a new file, and
we'll call this one default.astro.
Inside of this, we are going to move
a lot of what was in the index.astro.
And I think I have this
stored up in the markup, yes.
So in this markup folder,
there is a starter here.
And this is all the markup we want
to use in our default layout.
So let's look a little
bit at what this does.
I'll make this bigger.
So we've got our head component, and
I'm gonna use a few Google fonts in this.
So we set up the "preconnect" here.
We set up our favicon,
we've got a link to the actual
Google font that we're gonna use.
And then we add in a title, so
that we can identify our site.
Next, we've got a header so
the header has a link to the homepage with
a logo we've got todo to add in NAV items.
And a todo to add in display content.
And then we wrap the whole
thing up with some footer.
You can functionally ignore the footer.
I mostly just left it in there for
the link demo.
So with that,
this is the layout that we wanna use.
And it looks as you can see,
it's we're just telling Astro,
here's some HTML that we want you to use.
So this isn't done yet, but we're
gonna go ahead and give it a shot and
see how this works.
So I'm gonna go into my index.astro.
And I'm gonna introduce something called
frontmatter, which is how Astro files or
Astro components allow us to do
kind of like build time processing.
It allows us to do stuff that
won't show up in the browser.
And the way that I'm gonna
do this is I'm gonna import
my layout from layouts/default.astro.
So that's the file we just created.
And then instead of having all of this
I'm going to change it to a layout.
And so this is then all we
need inside of our index
because the layout is handled elsewhere.
Now, this is gonna break but I wanna
show you how this works to start and
then we'll look at how to fix it.
So if we look at the homepage right now,
you can see that we've got the header and
footer, but we're missing our content.
So how do we get that
content into our layout?
Because this is the way
that we want this to work.
We're passing in the content
of the page as children, but
Astro components aren't React components,
so
we don't have that concept of like
adding children in there as a prop.
Instead, we do something different
in an Astro component.
Now, frontmatter can do a lot,
instead of kind of doing a whole
session on the individual
pieces of frontmatter and
what you can do with it, we're gonna
learn it incrementally as we go.
So we'll start with this,
we're importing a component.
And throughout the course of
this workshop, we'll do more and
more things with the frontmatter
in Astro components.
So stick with me, and
more things will become available.
There's also a whole section in the Astro
docs, which are excellent, that will help.
Kind of disambiguate anything that
you feel like I glossed over, or
if you just want a deep dive on a
particular concept, if we didn't cover it
in a way that you want,
definitely check out those Astro docs.
So what I'm gonna do next is I want this
content to show through in my layout.
So back in the default.astro,
we've got this to do to display content.
And the way this works in
Astro is you put in a slot.
And so a slot, it's very similar
to how children in React works.
The major difference is that
you can have named slots,
which allows you to have
multiple slots on your page.
So for example, if you wanted to
make the title of your page dynamic,
you could have a slot called title.
And then on each page, you could
specify the title tag on that page.
Now, there are easier ways to do that in
Astro where you can use the frontmatter
to specify the title and
so on and so forth.
But this is a really flexible and
powerful way to do it.
We're not gonna get into it because I feel
like a lot of times that's not necessary.
I think as you get into more complex
projects, you may need that, today for
what we're building,
we're not going to need that.
So we'll start here.
But as you can see, adding that slot,
now we've got the content,
is coming through, right?
So that's the guts of
how an Astro site works.
We've got layouts.
And if I go over to, I wanna actually
set this up in my About page as well,
because my About page right
now doesn't have that layout.
So if I head into my markdown file
I can do the same thing where I
add some frontmatter, but
frontmatter is a little bit different
this isn't an Astro component.
So we're not using in
JavaScript to import,
we just set a tag of layout or
a frontmatter property of layout and
give it the path.
So we save that and,
spelled it wrong, there it is.
So now, same concept,
we've got our home page is using a layout,
our About page is using a layout.
This is a combination of Astro
components and markdown files.
And all of that is running
off of the same layout.
Now, there are ways that you
can do some specialty things,
we'll look at that in just a minute here.
But this is giving us the control
we need to get through building
out the guts of our site,
our homepage and our About page.
So, at this point,
we're not styled we don't have any any,
like visual layout or anything like that.
So let's add that and
this is going to show another another
really powerful concept in Astro.
It's not original to Astro, this is
something that I believe was borrowed from
Vue, from Svelte, probably from
frameworks before that that I didn't use.
But it's the idea of a single
file component where
you can declare styles in line with your
your components and have those picked up.